It's Christmastime, shall we talk about trees?

I was reading about Knuth's [Fantasia
Apocalypta](https://www-cs-faculty.stanford.edu/~knuth/fant.html), and his
description of the "style" he wrote it in contains the wonderfully Knuthian
line "And of course a musical work on the Apocalypse should also contain
calypso." Naturally I had to look up whether or not this was a linguistic
coincidence, and --- in an odd turn of events, since these things usually tend
to work out --- it turns out that _apocalypse_ and _calypso_ are _not_
etymologically related.  _Apocalypse_ comes from the Greek root _kaluptein,_
"to cover," and so the _apocalypse_ is the "uncovering" or "revelation" (the
root _kel_ is related to _hell_). The word _calypso_ is of unknown origin, but
from the West Indies (this is distinct from _Calypso,_ the Greek mythological
nymph, whose name is indeed related to "covered," or "concealing").

I shared this with a good friend of mine and she immediately pointed out that
we should check out the word _eucalyptus_. She was right: _eucalyptus_ means
"well-covered," referring (not ironically to the bark as I originally thought
but rather) to the calyx, which [forms a lid over flowers when in
bud](http://www.microscopy-uk.org.uk/mag/indexmag.html?http://www.microscopy-uk.org.uk/mag/artoct07/bj-eucalyptus.html).

That got me thinking about eucalyptuses...

---

Lately I've spent a lot of time around the eucalyptuses in [Toyon and Arboretum
Groves](https://trees.stanford.edu/ENCYC/EUCnotes.htm) at Stanford and I've
noticed that the peeling bark of what I'm 80% sure is the [_Eucalyptus
globulus_](https://trees.stanford.edu/ENCYC/EUCglo.htm) (Tasmanian Blue Gum)
seems to climb up the tree in a whirling, helical pattern. I didn't have the
presence of mind to take a picture at the time but here's a picture [from
Wikimedia
Commons](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Eucalyptus_globulus#/media/File:Starr_031002-0027_Eucalyptus_globulus.jpg)
taken in Maui.

![lots of whooshing eucalyptuses](static/eucalyptus-grove.jpg)

Really it's just beautiful to me, the whorl reaching aspirationally towards the
sky. I'm reminded of Correggio's _Ganymede Abducted by the Eagle_, the way the
dog and the tree stump look up together, moving, turning even while frozen in
the painting.

![correggio's abduction of ganymede](static/correggio.jpg)

This much would be believable, just another quirk of nature. But here's the
truly odd thing: most of the trees seem to grow according to a thumbs-up
right-hand rule; if you were to try and screw them into the ground you would
turn them righty-tighty. _So eucalyptuses have some kind of chirality?_ I
rubbed my eyes, I thought I was dreaming.

But indeed, some hours of study later, I learned that the "spiral grain" is a
real thing in the study of wood formation.

---

In the Real World of economics spiral grain is considered a defect because it
reduces the structural quality of wood. But let us set that aside for a moment
and marvel at the phenomenon itself. I turn to Dr. John Maddern Harris'
wonderfully comprehensive 1989 text _Spiral Grain and Wave Phenomena in Wood
Formation_ (thanks Chandler for finding me a copy!) for details. Harris, citing
confusion about the convention in prior work, carefully defines LH (left-handed
"sinistral") and RH (right-handed "dextral") spirals (I wonder if he was aware
of the right-hand-rule convention from E&M, which would simplify matters here).
Perhaps more entertainingly Harris introduces the German words as well:

> Numerous other expressions have been used to describe spiral direction,
> reflecting no doubt the notorious difficulty of so doing without waving of
> arms and twisting of wrists. In the German literature the terms "sonnig" and
> "wider- sonnig" are frequently encountered. Their meaning is "with the sun"
> and "against the sun", and hence (in the Northern Hemisphere!) they relate to
> LH and RH spiral grain respectively.

Here's a picture of a eucalyptus from Harris' book.

![spiral-grained eucalyptus](static/eucalyptus-spiral.png)

Certain species do indeed show predilections for certain handednesses.
Furthermore, certain species _change_ handedness over the course of their
lives. In Harald SÃ¤ll 2002 doctoral thesis [Spiral Grain in Norway
Spruce](https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:206846/FULLTEXT01.pdf) I
learned the remarkable fact that the Norway Spruce begins life as a left-handed
spiral grain, but over the decades transitions to a right-handed spiral grain.
The drawing below is from his thesis:

![spiral grain reversal in spruce trees](static/spruce-spiral.png)

[We don't fully understand why trees
spiral](https://www.conifers.org/topics/spiral_grain.php), much less how they
pick a direction. The most fanciful explanation I've come across --- the one I
would like to believe --- is that there is some kind of Coriolis effect at
work. But I will admit that both handednesses have been observed in both
hemispheres, which weakens that theory.

At the moment I'm on a quest to find a (translated, ideally) copy of Meyer's
1949 article _Sprachliche und literarische Bemerkungen zum Problem "Drehwuchs"_
published in _Mitt Schweiz Centralanst Forst Veruschswes_ (26:331-347) to learn
more about the linguistic history of chirality in relation to spiral grains.
Until then...

**Open question:** What's going on here, why are eucalyptuses right-handed?

**Further reading:** Noah Rosenberg's
[Xtrees](https://xtrees.sites.stanford.edu/tree-gallery) site about Stanford
trees --- I found this while reading about eucalyptuses!
