One of the reasons I love computer science is that in a good community,
everyone is a teacher. You don't need to attain some degree of credibility
before you can go around helping others---you just need to have information and
the will to share it. That's why I can write informative blog posts and help
people debug Python issues. It's why StackOverflow exists and thrives.

It's like we're all trying to climb a mountain, and we do so by lending a hand
to whoever's below us while getting a boost from whoever's above us. The people
at the very top are researchers, people blazing new trails and discovering new
computer science.

In a way, this is *better* than the classical model of those at the top of the
mountain pulling us all up. Someone who has just understood an idea---recursion,
the Y combinator, type theory, whatever---is better-equipped to teach it than
someone who takes it for granted having worked with that idea for ages.

...except it doesn't quite work out like that. The problem is, somewhere near
the middle of the mountain, people stop helping you up. After the first few
cliffs, you suddenly lose sight of the smarter people, the people who were
always a step ahead of you and ready to help. You have to pull yourself up, and
that's hard and lonely. And you wonder where they all went.

Then you look down, and you realize that all those people are back at the
base of the mountain running "Learn Python in Two Weeks" workshops.

---

Why do we put so much time, money, and energy into teaching newbies computer
science?

Part of it---and it's hard to admit---is that it looks *really* good. Teaching
intro CS looks like community service. For institutions, it's a great selling
point. For students, it's r&eacute;sum&eacute; material.

It's also *easy*. You know how to teach someone the basics of JavaScript
because you know those things so well. It's trivial to find students, because
everyone wants to learn web development and start the next Facebook.

On a less cynical note, it's *fun*. Teaching is inherently fun, and CS is
something that we have the opportunity to teach to an excited audience without
any formal barriers.

---

(Just to disclaim myself: I totally believe in getting more people into CS and
providing young students with opportunities to learn. I just believe in keeping
a very high standard for these opportunities, and (more importantly) leaving
them as just that: opportunities.)

---

Anyhow. I see two major problems with this.

Firstly, there are now a million different ways a beginner can learn CS, and so
there is naturally a huge variance in quality. I think one of the saddest
things is when someone is promised to be taught "web development" and is
instead force-fed a PHP crash-course that confuses them, potentially turning
them away from CS. Pedagogy is hard; it should be left to the experts.

Of course, "expert" doesn't necessarily mean "has a teaching degree". I would
trust an excited teenager who just HTML'd his first blog to do a perfectly good
job teaching a newbie web development.

As much as I support entreating beginners to learn CS, I believe that the best
learning is self-driven. The people who will go on to have happy, successful
careers in technology don't need to be led by the hand. They will figure things
out for themselves without a curriculum, and they will probably end up learning
more from the process.

All this attention towards teaching beginners is superfluous and only serves to
dilute the brilliant resources that amazing teachers spend time creating.

Secondly, focusing so intently on teaching beginners takes attention away from
the "intermediates". People who have conquered the first few cliffs, and are
now looking up at the next few. The number of resources for such people is
strikingly lower. Once you've graduated a beginning course, you don't know
which way to proceed.

Everyone in the CS world has a responsibility to guide those below them.

Paying attention here would catalyze progress, and give hundreds of smart high
schoolers (and middle schoolers) around the world goals and ways to achieve
them.

Remember when I said CTFs are better than hackathons? This is another reason
why. CTFs cater to both beginners *and* experts alike, giving both challenges
and helping both find ways to learn new things.

---

So what can we do?

We can write blog posts about advanced topics. We can spend less time creating
beginners' tutorials, and more time telling post-beginners the way forward.
Creating maps on how to go from "experienced" to "expert".

Finally, we can try to bring smart, like-minded programmers of similar
experience levels together, because these interactions result in a great deal
of learning.
