Have you noticed the way streetlights shine through the bare branches of trees
on cold winter nights? Walking home from work tonight I was struck by the
almost overwhelming beauty of the scene. The light creates a perfect,
glittering halo around itself, like the moon in a Van Gogh painting. The tree
in turn all but reaches its fingers out to grasp the light. If you move your
head from side to side, it feels as if a wormhole has opened in the tree,
sucking the branches into the light's force field.

I think this happens because of the Fresnel effect. If the light hits a branch
at just the exact angle, the wood (like many other materials in the world)
becomes unexpectedly shiny. In the bramble that hang off of a tree's bare
branch, the only twigs that catch the light's glint are the ones that make a
specific shallow angle with your eye. By radial symmetry, it's not hard to see
that this should result in a glowing circular halo. It's similar to how divers
see a [circular window](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Snell%27s_window) on the
surface of the water when they look up, or the [22º
halo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/22°_halo) you sometimes see around the sun
--- but here the medium is wood, not water.

If you live in a place that has seasons, I encourage you to go and see this
effect for yourself. It's a hard phenomenon to capture on camera --- it
requires high dynamic range, high-resolution video, and patience outdoors when
it's cold and dark. For now, here is the best I could do with my old iPhone.
(I stabilized the light with a little Python script.)

<video style="width: 100%;" controls>
  <source src="./static/tree-fresnel.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  Your browser does not support the video tag.
</video>

For comparison, here are two frames from this video:

![Light outside tree](./static/tree-fresnel-000.png)

![Light inside tree](./static/tree-fresnel-196.png)
